# Instructions to the Evaluator (delete this section)

This file is meant to ultimately land (with appropriate edits) into the
project description page (in this projects directory).

Please adopt a friendly but critical perspective. You are trying to help the
other team, and no one is going to "lose points" for any shortcomings. The goal
is to get everyone as far towards their goals as possible!

Essential to a good "open" project is discoverability by a friendly netizen.
Ideally, someone would be able to get up to speed on a project without
bothering you until they have something useful or constructive to share! Thus,
please provide URLs below (where appropriate) where someone could find this
information on the internet.

## Real-world challenge

What new understanding will be obtained? What public good would be served? What
business opportunities are available? Who would benefit, who are
consumers/users of your data or technology?

Why are you motivated to work on this project?

## Data / Materials

What data sources or data collection methods have you used?  Where / how is
data stored? What will you do / have you done to get data? Is there important
metadata (e.g., time of collection, source, etc.)? Why is the data you have or
expect to have sufficient or insufficient to meet your challenge?

## Approach

What are the risks? What technical approaches have been explored, and which
remain to be explored? Where does the prototype "run?" What methods (e.g.,
statistics, signal processing, transformation) and tooling (e.g., python
libraries, hardware platforms) are being used/evaluated/considered?

What skills are needed, and what skills remain to be learned by your team? How
would someone learn these skills?

## Project Management

What is your first milestone? What is your current milestone? What is your
"final" milestone for completing this project (even if that milestone is
currently unreasonable ;).

How do you evaluate progress and work remaining? How are next tasks determined
and divided between team members?

Who did what / what role did people play, and how could you find out (e.g.,
from the issue tracker, meeting notes, git commits, etc.)?

## Other

Please provide any feedback you find useful! In particular, please help your
partner team to identify potential problems that might cause their project to
"fail." Also recommend any resources that you think may be useful.

Ideally, also "execute" or "test" the current prototype. This could range from
assembling the bill of materials (i.e., shopping cart) to build the hardware to
actually running some code on your own computer. If this is not possible,
please describe what would be necessary to do so, and why you are unable to.
