---
title: Assessing Cardiovascular Health
client: Xiaoding Zhuo
mentor:
team:
layout: project
---
## Note

This project is *not* actually about the main content of the course. However,
given interest in biomedical applications (and our lack of other projects), I'm
including this project for now.

## Background

Cardiovascular disease is the number 1 cause of death globally, causing 64
million deaths in 2015. It is estimated by the World Heart Federation that by
2030 the total global cost of cardiovascular diseases is set to rise from $863
billion in 2010 to $1,044 billion. Dr. Jonathan Maltz at Siemens Medical
Solutions and the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory has developed
technologies to characterize the health of human cardiovascular systems that
could lead to the early detection and prevention of cardiovascular diseases.
While developing a connected monitor device with high portability and
wearability, we hope to leverage this great opportunity at BIDS to explore the
potential of using healthcare data analytics to empower our device, and
increase its effectiveness for early detection and management of cardiovascular
diseases. The students will be working as the R&D arm of a fast-paced startup
to extract patterns and test hypotheses, and provide insights for the
development of a healthcare IOT platform that promotes longevity of life and
reduces costs for a wide range of stakeholders.

## Project Description

The students will use several cohorts of longitudinal cardiovascular studies to
test four main hypothesis:

 1. Will there be certain patterns regarding demographics or ECG readings
    associated with different types of cardiovascular outcomes, such as stroke,
    heart failure, or atherosclerosis?
 2. Will the change in ECG and other measurements serve as independent
    predictors of cardiovascular risk?
 3. Can we predict which lifestyle intervention/medication could be most useful
    for a person by pattern recognition?
 4. If possible, will machine learning approach could give better predictions
    than the traditional statistics analysis?

We are in the process of data collection. Data will include Cardiovascular
Health Study (CHS), the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study (ARIC), and
possibly Cooper Center Longitudinal Study (CCLS) and others. There are hundreds
of publications done on these datasets, and I will provide students the
reference on baseline statistic analysis and machine learning methodology to
get started.

We want to test the potential of combining data analytics with our wearable
device, and pave ways for future development of both the device and predictive
algorithms. Currently, we don't have data of high granularity, the ones you can
only get from a connected device, but we hope to identify some high level
patterns from those existing datasets so that once we have data, we can quickly
build up the analytics component.
