---
title: Measuring CEGA's impact
client: Temina Madon
mentor:
team:
layout: project
---
## About CEGA

The Center for Effective Global Action (CEGA) designs and tests solutions for
the problems of poverty, generating actionable evidence for policy-makers in
less developed countries. We are a West Coast network of researchers using
rigorous field trials, behavioral experiments, and tools from data science to
measure and maximize the impacts of economic development programs throughout
the world.

## Project Description

CEGA would like to trace the influence of our research on decision-making by
government agencies and multi-laterals (like the World Bank or the UN). To
demonstrate this influence, we cannot simply track citations of articles
published in the academic literature. Instead, we must search the grey
literature (i.e. agency reports), government websites, media outlets, and other
informal channels for traces of our work. We would like to identify an
automated way to capture these "paths of influence" -- e.g. through systematic
web search/content scraping, query of online report repositories, and/or
analysis of Twitter feeds and other social media streams. Additional work on
visualizing these "paths of influence" would be valuable, since it will help us
clearly articulate the returns to investment in our research.

As an institution, CEGA's mission is to promote widespread adoption of high
quality evidence -- and in particular, the research generated by academics in
our network. "Adoption" could come in the form of a new evidence-based
government policy, the implementation of a proven program by government
agencies or NGOs, or the use of a rigorously tested business strategy by a
company or startup. Our objective is to show how and where the adoption of
evidence occurs. But we would like to do this in a systematic way, rather than
through anecdotes and cherry-picked results. This will give us greater
credibility with donors, decision-makers, and other stakeholders. It will also
help us identify those studies, researchers, and initiatives that are most
relevant to (or influential within) the policy-maker community (which, in turn,
can inform our allocation of resources). There are several similar think tanks
and policy research institutes that would benefit from any methods or tools
developed by a student team focusing on this problem.
