---
title: Evaluating Tutoring for Primary Education
client: Prof. Rachel Slaybaugh and Dav Clark
mentor:
team:
layout: project
---
## Background

### Oakland Schools

Oakland has many neighborhoods and schools that are underserved from the
perspective of educational opportunities and resources. Many of the children in
these neighborhoods will grow up in communities characterized by higher than
average dropout rates, incarceration rates, violent events, etc.

To help change this trend, Rachel has helped start a program where Berkeley
students will mentor young children in STEM topics in underserved schools in
Oakland. To ensure this program is effective, we need to perform assessment of
the impact the program has. This has potential to grow into a new research
area.

### SHO Zemi

Dav has a nascent research program with a Japanese tutoring company with over
20,000 kids, many of which are engaged in highly comparable curricula. Thus, we
have the potential for MOOC-like scale, while still having more traditional
"direct" access to students and teachers. SHO Zemi also has a remarkable
dedication to evaluation and assessment within the teacher community.

### EdX

Dav is also currently the maintainer of UC Berkeley's EdX data. There's a lot
we could do with it, but the data ingest and management questions are quite
challenging! We might work with this data as a use-case to round out privacy
and other concerns in our data management approaches.

## Project Description

Develop measurement and data management approaches for educational
interventions. A particular focus will be on assisting Prof. Rachel Slaybaugh
with a project where UC Berkeley undergrads tutor second grade students in
underserved schools on Oakland ([DeCal course
website](http://www.decal.org/courses/3734)). Additional topics may include
improving UC Berkeley's (and others') handling of EdX data, and working with a
Japanese tutoring company (SHO Zemi) with over 20,000 students. We will engage
in design processes over the course of the semester, including assessment of
available technologies (e.g., making use of whatever phones, etc. kids happen
to have). Technology will likely include mobile approaches to experience
sampling, adaptive / automated testing over the web, and perhaps sensor- or
video-based affective measurement.
