---
title: Pervasive well-being technology
author: Dav Clark
presenters: Pablo Paredes
layout: class
---

Well-being is defined as the characteristic of humans to feel well. This
concept is based mostly in obtaining an optimal mental health state. Newer
research has showed that appropriate stress management, an increase in positive
emotions and empathic social interaction generates improvements not only in
mental and affective states, but even in physical ones. However, the only way
to reach well-being is by maintaining a healthy lifestyle, which implies that
technologies that support this goal should measure and intervene "life" itself!

The good news is that, with the advent and adoption of the Internet of Things
(IoT) and Big Data technologies, and the fast growth of novel fields such as
affective computing and critical engineering, we are in a unique position to
challenge the way we think of technology with regards to its use towards
well-being. With so many opportunities to sense and consume data we can evolve
from a reactive diagnostic health approach towards one that takes advantage of
pervasive technology to foster good habits, resilience and personal growth.

In this talk I will discuss a group of technologies that I encapsulate in two
parts: "sensor-less" sensing and "Opportunistic Interventions." These new
perspectives present novel ways to repurpose current data streams to be able to
measure and investigate human traits and trends as they relate to mental and
physical health. I will discuss some of the ideas behind these concepts, which
leverage opportunistic use of technology that has already survived the chasm of
adoption. Furthermore I will provide a perspective on how we could challenge
the way traditional and newer pervasive technologies, such as cars, computers,
urban lighting, the web, mobile and wearable devices are used to transform them
into key enablers of well-being.
